README.md, before:

# Cardano benchmark tools

## Introduction

This is a collection of small utilities that I used to analyze a regression
in the `cardano-node` software. Some of the functionality may be integrated
in existing tools or converted into standalone profiling tools in the future.

## Preparation

### Non-Haskell libraries

For building `cardano-node`, you need the following
libraries visible through `pkg-config`:

- `libsecp256k1`
- `libsodium`
- `libblst`
- `openssl`

### GHC

GHC 8.10.7 is required to run the `ghc8107` variants of the benchmarks.
GHC 9.6.4 for the `ghc964` variant. For some configurations a customized
variant of GHC 9.6.4 is needed. Get that from
(https://gitlab.haskell.org/luite/ghc) (XXX branch!)

```
$ ln -s /path/to/my/ghc-8.10.7 ghc/ghc-8.10.7
$ ln -s /path/to/my/ghc-pkg-8.10.7 ghc/ghc-pkg-8.10.7
$ ln -s /path/to/my/ghc-9.6.4 ghc/ghc-9.6.4
$ ln -s /path/to/my/ghc-pkg-9.6.4 ghc/ghc-pkg-9.6.4
```

### Eventlog2html

`eventlog2html` needs to be in the `PATH` for profiling configurations that
depend on the eventlog.

### Cardano-node

The `cardano-node` directory needs to contain a source repository of the
cardano node project. Be sure to use the correct branch.

```
$ git clone https://github.com/IntersectMBO/cardano-node.git
```

### Haskell dependencies

We use a large cabal project that contains most Haskell dependencies for
the purpose of benchmarking. This allows us to quickly make changes to
upstream packages and keep track of how the changes affect performance.

The dependencies are contained in `lib` subdirectories. The intended purpose of
the lib subdirectories is as follows:

  * `lib.orig`: untouched versions of the upstream libraries. Don't change these.
  * `lib.opt`: local modifications for benchmarking. A diff between `lib.opt`
     and `lib.orig` is generated for each benchmark run that uses `lib.opt`

To populate the `lib.orig` and `lib.opt` directores and generate the
corresponding `config/generated/libs-orig.project` and
`config/generated/libs-opt.project`, run the following command:

```
cabal run localize-dependencies
```

Note: You may need to add more packages to the `excludedPackages` list
in `localize-dependencies/Main.hs`, for example if the `cardano-node`
repository adds more packages or if a new dependency cycle is introduced.

# Usage


Use the `run-bench` program to run a benchmark profile:

```
cabal run run-bench solo-xs ghc964-orig-vanilla
```

Or you can run all the configurations for a single profile:

```
cabal run run-bench solo all
```

# Implementation Notes/Remarks

This package is experimental and was put together quickly during an
investigation of `cardano-node` performance. There are some implementation
notes/remarks.

- I'm not sure if we always get a complete package list with
  `localize-dependencies`, perhaps we can force it to use an empty package db
  to start
- We need some fixes to `ghc-events` to correctly parse/emit GHC 9.6 events.
  Build `filterlog` and `eventlog2html` against this version!
- More postprocessing is needed, and cleaning of the results.
- we should add a lock file to prevent running multiple benchmarks at the same
  time (since we overwrite `cardano-node-service.nix` one run can influence
  results of another)
- can we find a way to benchmark without changing `cardano-node-service.nix`?

Commit message:

allow build with GHC 8.10 again, and update docs

README.md, after:

# Cardano benchmark tools

## Introduction

This is a collection of small utilities that I used to analyze a regression
in the `cardano-node` software. Some of the functionality may be integrated
in existing tools or converted into standalone profiling tools in the future.

## Preparation

### Non-Haskell libraries

For building `cardano-node`, you need the following
libraries visible through `pkg-config`:

- `libsecp256k1`
- `libsodium`
- `libblst`
- `openssl`

### GHC

GHC 8.10.7 is required to run the `ghc8107` variants of the benchmarks.
GHC 9.6.4 for the `ghc964` variant. For some configurations a customized
variant of GHC 9.6.4 is needed. Get that from
(https://gitlab.haskell.org/luite/ghc) (XXX branch!)

```
$ ln -s /path/to/my/ghc-8.10.7 ghc/ghc-8.10.7
$ ln -s /path/to/my/ghc-pkg-8.10.7 ghc/ghc-pkg-8.10.7
$ ln -s /path/to/my/ghc-9.6.4 ghc/ghc-9.6.4
$ ln -s /path/to/my/ghc-pkg-9.6.4 ghc/ghc-pkg-9.6.4
```

### Eventlog2html

`eventlog2html` needs to be in the `PATH` for profiling configurations that
depend on the eventlog.

### Cardano-node

The `cardano-node` directory needs to contain a source repository of the
cardano node project. Be sure to use the correct branch.

```
$ git clone https://github.com/IntersectMBO/cardano-node.git
```

### Haskell dependencies

We use a large cabal project that contains most Haskell dependencies for
the purpose of benchmarking. This allows us to quickly make changes to
upstream packages and keep track of how the changes affect performance.

The dependencies are contained in `lib` subdirectories. The intended purpose of
the lib subdirectories is as follows:

  * `lib.orig`: untouched versions of the upstream libraries. Don't change these.
  * `lib.opt`: local modifications for benchmarking. A diff between `lib.opt`
     and `lib.orig` is generated for each benchmark run that uses `lib.opt`

To populate the `lib.orig` and `lib.opt` directores and generate the
corresponding `config/generated/libs-orig.project` and
`config/generated/libs-opt.project`, run the following command:

```
cabal run localize-dependencies
```

This uses the GHC version in the PATH to resolve the dependencies of
the `cardano-node` executable. The package has been tested with GHC 9.6
as the GHC version for `localize-dependencies`.

Note: You may need to add more packages to the `excludedPackages` list
in `localize-dependencies/Main.hs`, for example if the `cardano-node`
repository adds more packages or if a new dependency cycle is introduced.
You may also need to update `configs/include/default.project` to allow
the solver to make a plan for all compiler versions.

# Usage


Use the `run-bench` program to run a benchmark profile:

```
cabal run run-bench solo-xs ghc964-orig-vanilla
```

Or you can run all the configurations for a single profile:

```
cabal run run-bench solo all
```

# Implementation Notes/Remarks

This package is experimental and was put together quickly during an
investigation of `cardano-node` performance. There are some implementation
notes/remarks.

- We need some fixes to `ghc-events` to correctly parse/emit GHC 9.6 events.
  Build `filterlog` and `eventlog2html` against this version!
- More postprocessing is needed, and cleaning of the results.
- we should add a lock file to prevent running multiple benchmarks at the same
  time (since we overwrite `cardano-node-service.nix` one run can influence
  results of another)
- can we find a way to benchmark without changing `cardano-node-service.nix`?
